                    Model Change Bulletin              
              
                            MCB#1                 5/22/89

                    COMPLEX1 (dated 86064)

 

     This Model Change Bulletin essentially initiates the
activities of the SCRAM BBS for this model.

      The COMPLEX1 model code available from this bulletin board
is the same code that presently (05/22/89) resides on the EPA IBM
3090 and the EPA UNAMAP Bulletin Board and is dated 86064. The
computer code could be different from that at the NTIS due to the
EPA's recent conversion from the UNIVAC to the IBM computer
system, however there are no known differences in model
calculations. It is currently the recommended code for this
model. 

     This model will henceforth be identified by its name and a
julian date, i.e.: COMPLEX1 (dated 86064). Future changes to this
model will be identified by an updated julian date found on the
first line of the model source code and followed by a reference
to a SCRAM BBS Model Change Bulletin (MCB#n) which will explain
the nature and contents of the changes. All Model Change
Bulletins for this model will always be available for back
reference on this BBS. In the future, notification of changes
(MCBs) to this model will be made in the SCRAM ALERTS section
of this BBS immediately following the LOGON procedure.

      The source code for this model has been compiled and tested
on an IBM 3090 computer. Work is underway to modify the code for
operation on the PC, VAX and SUN computers. Watch SCRAM ALERTS
for notification of new MCBs about COMPLEX1. 

                       ******************
                       * Important Note *  
                       ******************
   
      New Model Change Bulletins will ONLY be issued when there
is a change to the source code for this model. Changes to test
cases and/or any pre and post processors that are included in the
archived file for this model will be addressed and appropriately
identified in an amendment to the model's latest MCB with
notification posted in the SCRAM ALERTS section of the BBS.
 
